What Is Bitcoin?
Bitcoin is a collection of concepts and technologies that form the basis of a digital 
money ecosystem. Units of currency called bitcoin are used to store and transmit 
value among participants in the Bitcoin network. Bitcoin users communicate with 
each other using the Bitcoin protocol primarily via the internet, although other 
transport networks can also be used. The Bitcoin protocol stack, available as open 
source software, can be run on a wide range of computing devices, including laptops 
and smartphones, making the technology easily accessible.
Tip
Notice how the unit of currency is called "bitcoin" with a small b, and the system is 
called "Bitcoin", with a capital B.
Users can transfer bitcoin over the network to do just about anything that can be 
done with conventional currencies, including buying and selling goods, sending 
money to people or organizations, or extending credit. Bitcoin can be purchased, 
sold, and exchanged for other currencies at specialized currency exchanges. Bitcoin 
in a sense is the perfect form of money for the internet because it is fast, secure, and 
borderless.
Unlike traditional currencies, bitcoin is entirely virtual. There are no physical coins or 
even digital coins per se. The coins are implied in transactions that transfer value 
from sender to recipient. Users of Bitcoin own keys that allow them to prove 
ownership of bitcoin in the Bitcoin network. With these keys, they can sign 
transactions to unlock the value and spend it by transferring it to a new owner. Keys 
are often stored in a digital wallet on each user’s computer or smartphone. 
Possession of the key that can sign a transaction is the only prerequisite to spending 
bitcoin, putting the control entirely in the hands of each user.
Bitcoin is a distributed, peer-to-peer system. As such, there is no "central" server or 
point of control. Bitcoins, i.e. units of bitcoin, are created through a process called 
"mining," which involves competing to find solutions to a mathematical problem 
while processing Bitcoin transactions. Any participant in the Bitcoin network (i.e., 
anyone using a device running the full Bitcoin protocol stack) may operate as a 
miner, using their computer’s processing power to verify and record transactions. 
Every 10 minutes, on average, a Bitcoin miner can validate the transactions of the 
past 10 minutes and is rewarded with brand new bitcoin. Essentially, Bitcoin mining 
decentralizes the currency-issuance and clearing functions of a central bank and 
replaces the need for any central bank.
The Bitcoin protocol includes built-in algorithms that regulate the mining function 
across the network. The difficulty of the processing task that miners must perform is 
adjusted dynamically so that, on average, someone succeeds every 10 minutes
 
regardless of how many miners (and how much processing) are competing at any 
moment. The protocol also halves the rate at which new bitcoin is created every 4 
years, and limits the total number of bitcoin that will be created to a fixed total just 
below 21 million coins. The result is that the number of bitcoin in circulation closely 
follows an easily predictable curve that approaches 21 million by the year 2140. Due 
to bitcoin’s diminishing rate of issuance, over the long term, the Bitcoin currency is 
deflationary. Furthermore, bitcoin cannot be inflated by "printing" new money above 
and beyond the expected issuance rate.
Behind the scenes, Bitcoin is also the name of the protocol, a peer-to-peer network, 
and a distributed computing innovation. The bitcoin currency is really only the first 
application of this invention. Bitcoin represents the culmination of decades of 
research in cryptography and distributed systems and includes four key innovations 
brought together in a unique and powerful combination. Bitcoin consists of:
 A decentralized peer-to-peer network (the Bitcoin protocol)
 A public transaction ledger (the blockchain)
 A set of rules for independent transaction validation and currency issuance 
(consensus rules)
 A mechanism for reaching global decentralized consensus on the valid 
blockchain (Proof-of-Work algorithm)
As a developer, I see Bitcoin as akin to the internet of money, a network for 
propagating value and securing the ownership of digital assets via distributed 
computation. There’s a lot more to Bitcoin than first meets the eye.
In this chapter we’ll get started by explaining some of the main concepts and terms, 
getting the necessary software, and using Bitcoin for simple transactions. In the 
following chapters, we’ll start unwrapping the layers of technology that make Bitcoin 
possible and examine the inner workings of the Bitcoin network and protocol.
Digital Currencies Before Bitcoin
The emergence of viable digital money is closely linked to developments in 
cryptography. This is not surprising when one considers the fundamental challenges 
involved with using bits to represent value that can be exchanged for goods and 
services. Three basic questions for anyone accepting digital money are:
1. Can I trust that the money is authentic and not counterfeit?
2. Can I trust that the digital money can only be spent once (known as the 
“double-spend” problem)?

3. Can I be sure that no one else can claim this money belongs to them and not 
me?
Issuers of paper money are constantly battling the counterfeiting problem by using 
increasingly sophisticated papers and printing technology. Physical money addresses 
the double-spend issue easily because the same paper note cannot be in two places 
at once. Of course, conventional money is also often stored and transmitted digitally. 
In these cases, the counterfeiting and double-spend issues are handled by clearing 
all electronic transactions through central authorities that have a global view of the 
currency in circulation. For digital money, which cannot take advantage of esoteric 
inks or holographic strips, cryptography provides the basis for trusting the legitimacy 
of a user’s claim to value. Specifically, cryptographic digital signatures enable a user 
to sign a digital asset or transaction proving the ownership of that asset. With the 
appropriate architecture, digital signatures also can be used to address the doublespend issue.
When cryptography started becoming more broadly available and understood in the 
late 1980s, many researchers began trying to use cryptography to build digital 
currencies. These early digital currency projects issued digital money, usually backed 
by a national currency or precious metal such as gold.
Although these earlier digital currencies worked, they were centralized and, as a 
result, were easy to attack by governments and hackers. Early digital currencies used 
a central clearinghouse to settle all transactions at regular intervals, just like a 
traditional banking system. Unfortunately, in most cases, these nascent digital 
currencies were targeted by worried governments and eventually litigated out of 
existence. Some failed in spectacular crashes when the parent company liquidated 
abruptly. To be robust against intervention by antagonists, whether legitimate 
governments or criminal elements, a decentralized digital currency was needed to 
avoid a single point of attack. Bitcoin is such a system, decentralized by design, and 
free of any central authority or point of control that can be attacked or corrupted.
History of Bitcoin
Bitcoin was invented in 2008 with the publication of a paper titled "Bitcoin: A Peerto-Peer Electronic Cash System,"[1] written under the alias of Satoshi Nakamoto 
(see [satoshi_whitepaper]). Nakamoto combined several prior inventions such as bmoney and HashCash to create a completely decentralized electronic cash system 
that does not rely on a central authority for currency issuance or settlement and 
validation of transactions. The key innovation was to use a distributed computation 
system (called a "Proof-of-Work" algorithm) to conduct a global "election" every 10 
minutes, allowing the decentralized network to arrive at consensus about the state of 
transactions. This elegantly solves the issue of double-spend where a single currency 
unit can be spent twice. Previously, the double-spend problem was a weakness of 
